Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Walter Scheidel. He is
Dickinson Professor in the Humanities and professor of History
at Stanford University. And today we're talking about his
most recent book, What Is Ancient History. So, Doctor
Scheidel, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you for having me. So,
uh, we're going to go through the main arguments
that you present in the book when, in regards
to how we deal with so-called ancient history and
even what that means, but to start off with,
why do you think that studies of ancient history
tend to be so restrictive and focused almost exclusively
on Rome and
Greece? I think there are a number of reasons.
It hasn't always been like this. So if you
go back a few centuries, even in Europe, even
in Western Europe, when people looked at antiquity, they
would not just look at the Greeks and Romans,
they would look at the Hebrew tradition and the
Old Testament, what little was known about Egypt, and
so on. And then gradually over time everything became
more and more concentrated on Greece and Rome. And
it was partly because there had always been a
sense of uh uh some cultural lineage, um, if
you will, reaching from antiquity to the Middle Ages
to the Renaissance to modern, uh, Europe and the
West more generally. But there was also a revival
in a way, uh, in the late 18th century,
early 19th century, that was tied up with romanticism.
Uh, NASCENT nationalism, colonialism, racism, all these things that
became more prominent in that particular period, where Europeans
in particular decided that the only worthy ancestors for
themselves were the Greeks and Romans. They, the Europeans,
were really special, and so the Greeks and Romans
had to be special too, and there was some
kind of special kinship, some special affinity between them
and those two select ancient cultures, and that's when
the current Organizational structures were created, universities, fields, disciplines,
and so on. So to some extent, the result
of this narrowing is still with us and hasn't
really been properly overcome.
But when we use the term ancient uh uh
applied to the kinds of civilizations we are referring
to, what kinds of attitudes does it denote? I
mean, is it disdain, is it admiration or something
else?
We are stuck with that particular label because hundreds
of years ago, calling something ancient was a term
of approval, of veneration, right? The ancients are people
who have much to teach us and they're really
grand and glorious. And then about 200 years ago
in English, at any rate, a new expression appears,
which is that's ancient history, and that's something you
say when you want to dismiss something as irrelevant
or obsolete. And that's, it's not by coincidence that
it shows up in the early 19th century with
increasing modernization, um, and so on, but we're now
stuck with this. So when most people, non-academics, I
think, use the term ancient now. Uh, THEY don't
necessarily attribute any positive connotations to that. They think
of something a long time ago, doesn't matter anymore.
Why should we care? So it's a bit of
a burden in a way, even for the academic
field, um, to teach something called ancient history.
So, but what does the term ancient history really
mean? What does it refer to? And this is
the history of the peoples from, as I mentioned
at the as I mentioned at the beginning, from
mostly Greece and Rome from a few 1000 years
ago, the true ancient, ancient history.
Yeah, I mean, there's no standard definition, as you
say, many people will think of some Greece and
Romema. Greece and Rome and their predecessors, Egypt, Mesopotamia,
and so on. Some people will think of early
China, early India. Very few people, if any, will
think of Central Eurasia or the Americas. My My
view is that ancient history is a global phenomenon,
that's something that happened all around the world, not
literally everywhere, but in many parts of the globe
at different times, at different speeds, in different places.
We shouldn't think of it as a period. That
is defined by a starting year and an end
year. We should think of it as a phase
of development, of transformative development, when people in different
parts of the globe independently of one another to
a large extent, came up with similar innovations and
bundled them together in ways that will determine the
way we live today. That I think is the
broadest and most reasonable definition, if you will, of
ancient history.
Yeah, we will come back to that point you
made about the ancient history being a global phenomenon
later in our conversation, but what would you say
are the main difficulties and obstacles when studying the
ancient past?
I think there are at least 31 is the
nature of the evidence of the data we have
to say anything at all, because it's of course
not like modern data. We have a super abundance
of information, archives, and all kinds of things. Often
in early societies there is some writing, little writing,
no writing in some cases. There is archaeology, which
is difficult to decipher, so it's the overall amount
and quality of the evidence. The second issue is
gaining access to that evidence. Even if they are
written texts, they are written in languages that for
the most part no longer exist. They have to
be deciphered. They have to be understood properly. You
have to establish the vocabulary. Once it comes to
archaeology, interpretation is necessarily ambiguous, right? There are different
ways of interpreting certain material remains, so that's a
big issue. And the third one, I think is
that early societies are meaningfully different from the societies.
We live in and that we are used to,
so our basic intuitions as to how things work
don't necessarily apply when we go back far enough
into the past. So you have a trifecta of
problems that you have to overcome in order to
deal with ancient civilizations.
So this is a point that you've already touched
on very briefly, but in the book at a
certain point you argue about how ancient history constitutes
a foundational phase of human development in which the
earliest versions of our current lifeways were created. I
mean, what aspects of our lifeways, institutions, and the
ways our societies are structured have originated in ancient
history?
Uh, THE short answer would be pretty much everything
that you can think of. Uh, BEFORE the end
of the last ice age, before the Holocene. Many,
many things that we take for granted did not
exist, and they only come into existence. I paint
them with a broad brush here, but they come
into existence only over the last 10,000 years or
so. Food production, which we all rely on domestication
of crops, domestication of animals, pastoralism, metallurgy, mining, uh,
any number of basic technologies, physical technologies. Physical infrastructure,
the fact that we live in houses, right, and
we have windows and staircases and any number of
gadgets, all these things don't exist, remarkably, uh, prior
to that date. Um, I, I could give you
a really long list, but I'm not going to
give you a long list. You just look around
you, and pretty much everything we use is some
upgraded version of something that was originally invented back
then, not the computers we currently use. It's a
bit of an exception. But even the basic materials
other than plastic are, you know, already rooted in
that very early period. There are social technologies, government,
taxation, organized warfare, jobs, all these things that really
define our existence. Formal education, all these various things
did not exist before that, schooling, you name it,
prisons. Pretty much the same thing, uh, and of
course literacy, the ability to write things down that
comes relatively late in the process. It's not ubiquitous,
but it's important, it's an important stage in that
development. And last but not least, the major world
religions that people still adhere to in their billions
today come out of that period, again, the later
stages of that particular phase, but it's certainly True,
it's true of the Judeo-Christian Islamic tradition. It's true
of Hinduism, of Buddhism, of Confucianism. All the major
belief systems, Zoroastrianism, they all come out of that
particular phase of development. You take all these things
together, cumulatively, they define the way we live. We
just use more of these things, upgraded versions of
these things, but they are ultimately the same things.
When it comes specifically to the development of writing,
how important was it and did it change the
way we approach human history?
It was important at the time, even though very
few people could generally read and write. It enables
certain things like larger scale government administration, keeping track
of things. It enables the creation of literary canons
so you can write down oral traditions and create
new genres like historiography and drama and all these
various things that writing is very useful for. But
you could even make a case that it's even
more important for us as historians studying the past
because historians have long distinguished between societies with writing.
That have a proper history, quote unquote, and his,
his Arab societies without writing that they usually consigned
to some kind of prehistory, but they don't, they're
not prehistoric. It just means we can't read their
histories. It doesn't make them structurally different. It just,
it just makes them different to us, the way
we look at them and approach them. And it's
one of the most unhelpful divisions in a way,
in the study of the past.
So this is a point that you also alluded
to earlier. When it comes to the developments you
enumerated, you argue in the book that they were
not synchronized and started at different times and unfolded
at different speeds in different parts of the world.
Why is that important to keep in mind?
It's important to keep in mind because of course
the world was not globalized, integrated the way it
is now. People had no idea what people were
doing in other parts of the world. Um, CONNECTIONS
had to be built up very, very gradually. It's
important because it means that we can't define ancient
history as a single period. That starts, you look
at Wikipedia, ancient history starts in 3000 BC because
in 3000 BC, the earliest forms of writing appeared
in Egypt and Mesopotamia. That's not very interesting for
people in China or Mexico or Central Africa, right,
because they had no idea this was happening. So,
we have to bear in mind that because of
ecological differences, for the most part, development happens um
at different times, at different speeds in different parts
of the world. Sometimes these developments, these innovations kick
in very early, like in West Asia, and then
in East Asia. Sometimes it takes longer, like in
Mesoamerica or in Peru or in sub-Saharan Africa, and
sometimes they never happen, like in Australia. FOR instance,
or in the Arctic, and there are ecological reasons
for that, but that shouldn't lead us to exclude
certain parts of the world from the study of
ancient history. We just have to be flexible. We
have to study the different ancient histories of those
different parts of the world on their own terms
as part of a larger whole, because if you,
if you take enough steps back, you look at
this. Um, IN, in, in, in, in the long
run of history, you realize there are many similarities
that people independently came up with similar solutions, totally
independently in the case of the Americas. There's no
contact between the Americas and the old world before
the Europeans, before the Vikings show up. That's a
very small kind of contact. So basically there's no
contact and yet you have very similar developments in
Mesoamerica, in the Andes, going back thousands of years,
the same way you have in Eurasia or in
parts of Africa. We have to bear that in
mind. If we don't bear this in mind, we'll
never understand that ancient history was a global phenomenon.
And do we have a good understanding as to
why similar developments occurred in places around the world,
particularly as you mentioned, the Americas and Afro-Eurasia, er,
in a completely independent manner. I mean, how was
it possible?
Well, let me give you a provocative answer to
that question. If we had already structured ancient history
in a global way, we would be in a
much better position to answer that question, right? Because
you have to study different parts of the world
side by side, systematically, comparatively. To identify certain variables,
certain factors, certain features that will produce certain outcomes,
we are still very much at the beginning because
by focusing on individual parts of the world, we
are not really well equipped to address this question
in a very satisfactory way. The provisional answer is
it's ultimately the environment, it's ecology. People used to
think it's racial characteristics that people are not all
the same. That's rubbish. As far as we can
tell, it's about the environment. People all come out
of Africa. They settle in different parts of the
globe. They encounter very different conditions, and those conditions
inevitably shape what they're able to do, what the
incentives are, the disincentives, and so on. And that
seems to account for much of the variation that
happens. There may be other factors too. But as
I said, we are in a sense still very
much at the beginning of really properly investigating this
question. In order to really figure it out, we
need a fully globalized comparative ancient history.
And these developments that occurred across the world uh
crowded out alternative arrangements, right, because things could have
developed differently.
That's very true. Once you have food production, you
have higher population densities. As a result, you have
states, you have cities, you have large armies, you
have capabilities, you have a class structure, you have
oppression, you have inequality, you have slavery. You have
all these terrible things that make these societies very
competitive, and we can see historically how these very
competitive societies absorb others or destroy them or, you
know, subjugate them as European colonizers. WOULD do later
on. Those are almost inevitable outcomes. Once these bundles
of features are in place thousands of years ago,
it was just a matter of time till they
would spread and expand and eventually encompass the entire
planet, and that certainly happened. That has certainly happened.
And in so doing, they have really trapped us
in one particular way of life, so to speak.
There are still significant cultural differences between different parts
of the. WORLD, of course. But ultimately, we all
tend to do things a certain way, uh, so
to speak, when it is perfectly possible that many
thousands of years ago, foragers, hunter-gatherers would do things
differently, in meaningfully different ways, that's just no longer
feasible, right? Everything has been taken over by the
most competitive and in a way, most dominant and
sometimes most violent societies that this process has produced.
In the book you also talk about and critique
in a way the way academics have approached ancient
history, and I even have a quote here. You
talk about the intensely fragmented ethnocentric and parochial manner
in which it is routinely perceived, studied, and taught.
So, uh, could you tell us more about that?
How have academics approached ancient history?
I think a big part of the problem, problem
of the, of the history of scholarship is, of
course, increasing specialization. You go back a few 100
years, people were polymaths, right? They would do a
number of different things, usually poorly. They knew a
little about lots of things. And we have now
ended up in a situation. But most people know
very much about very little, so to speak. They
become specialists because that's how you create new knowledge
or that's the approved way of creating new knowledge.
That's how the whole uh uh uh academic structure
works, the training, the incentive structures, promotion, hiring, you
name it, right? Um, SO that is inevitable. It
has produced an enormous increase in knowledge and understanding,
so it was a good thing. But as always,
there's a trade-off. You have more of a good
thing, you get more of a bad thing at
the same time, and the bad thing is hyperspecialization.
We find it more difficult to make connections. We,
we find it more difficult to make connections to
other disciplines. And in the case of early history,
we find it much more difficult to make connections
to other parts of the world that are early
or ancient. And so we don't talk to people
who study. Very similar things in different parts of
the world, even though if we did, we'd be
better off. We just don't have time to do
it or we are not motivated to do it,
or there are disincentives to doing it because we're
rewarded for being specialists. That's the very short answer
in a nutshell. And so what you end up
with is a de facto fragmentation of the world
that is being studied into little bits and pieces.
Where some people study the Roman Republic and other
people studied the early Roman Empire and the late
Roman Empire, and the post-Roman societies, and the Greeks
before Rome and the Greeks under Rome, and the
Greeks after Rome and Byzantium. And then there are
50 other areas of specialization where people study, I
don't know, early Japan or the Olmecs, uh, in,
in Mexico or what, or Zimbabwe or what have
you, right? And they're all specialists, and there's very
little if any communication between them.
And this specialization you referred to goes back to
the 19th century, right? It was then that the
sort of dismembering of ancient history started.
Yes, I mean, many fields are being dismembered in
that period, but for ancient history, uh, it's particularly
visible because, as I said, it was, um, it
was, um, joined with at the very least the
study of what we call the ancient Near East
or West Asia. The people call it the Old
Testament tradition, Egypt, Carthage, and so on. And even
those neighbors get are pushed away or consigned to
their own many disciplines, whereas a lot of prestige
and resources are allocated to the study of Greece
and Roman, especially Greeks, because the Greeks are seen
as the originators and the Romans in a way
are already sort of second rank, they're inheritors of
all the wonderful things the Greeks came up with.
But when it comes to specialization and its drawbacks,
do you think it's possible for us to do
it any other way? I mean, with the vast
amount of knowledge that we have accumulated even in
specialized areas of history, is it possible for people
to be more generalists?
Well, people to some extent have to be experts
on something. I think that's inevitable. But they also
need to collaborate, and we have a great model
which is archaeology. You can't go out as a
single person and do an excavation. I mean, you
could, but you wouldn't get very far. You need
people who have expertise in different areas. They have
to come together and they have to work together
to make this happen. And historians very rarely do
this. They don't get together with historians of similar
kinds of societies. Uh, EVEN though they could learn
a lot from doing this, they rarely get together
with them in research or in teaching, and that
would be a model, a model that already exists.
We all have to be experts, but we need
to be experts who are not only aware of
the fact that there are other experts out there,
we have to be willing and motivated to go
and actually work with them to create new kinds
of knowledge.
So I would like to go back for a
second to the focus on Greece and Rome specifically.
How has it developed and why this obsession with
so-called Western civilization?
As I said, to some part it's, it's specialization,
but there's another, uh, dimension to it. And the
dimension has to do with valuation that people starting
in the late 18th century in Western Europe, um,
got a very high opinion of themselves because they
were unbelievably successful. They were going out, colonizing other
parts of the globe, dominating others, even the great
civilizations of China, India, the Middle East, and so
on. So they figured, well, we must be very
special people, and we are very special people for
a number of reasons. It used to be Christianity,
but with secularization it becomes a little less popular
as an argument. You see the rise of scientific
racism, saying white people are just better than other
people, and that's why we are more successful. And
then you get the cultural approach saying, well, it's
really about our cultural lineage. It's because we have
inherited the wisdom of the Greeks and the Romans,
and that makes us more capable. And now it's
our duty to really take good care of that
inheritance, of that legacy, and study them in even
greater detail in a more professional way. And it's
also seen at the same time, this may seem
a bit paradoxical as a counterweight to modernization. That
people about the Romantics in particular, were disenchanted with
modernization. They would see it as soulless, the takeover
of industry, of commerce, of rationalism, of all these
things that worked really well, but they left something
to be desired. And the idea was if we
go back to the source, the Greeks in particular,
who are really pure, they are authentic, they're original,
they are a fountain of original insight and wisdom
and beauty. Uh, IF we go and we commune
with them very intimately, it will improve us as
people, and it will enable us to deal better
with the disadvantages of modernization. But we have to
do this not as amateurs, which people have done
for a long time. We have to do it
as professionals, as scholars. We have to know their
language really, really well. We have to know their
material culturally well, their art, their philosophy, everything that
they produced is worthy of study because that's the
only way we can actually commune with them, establish
this kind of special relationship that we have anyway,
but we have to bring it to full fruition.
And as a result, we need to teach more
Greek and Latin in school, in high school, at
university. It has to be an important part of
educating the bourgeoisie, uh, making sure there's a standard
that people have to adhere to to prove they
are worthy of admission to privileged, um, society, get
a certain kind of jobs, uh, and so on.
So it's a huge package of. Cultural prestige, romantic
yearning, scholarly professionalization all packaged together in a way
that creates a very, very strong emphasis on the
Greeks and Romans in education and in the public
arena in that period, which you see reflected in
literature, in architecture, in any number of domains.
And people study what is known as the classics,
the Greek and Roman classics. How were they established?
The classics are interesting. They actually really come in
a sense out of Germany, the idea of Alter
tombs Wiesssenschaft, that there would be a science of
antiquity, because up to that point people focused very
much on language. The idea was you had to
learn a language well enough to imitate Cicero, other
ancient authors, and write like the Romans. Um, AND
that worked well for a really long time, and
you had to understand Greek for the New Testament,
and you had to understand Latin for Roman law
and all these various things. But then the idea
was, no, we have to be holistic. You can't
just focus on language and certain kinds of texts.
We have to understand, uh, Greece and Rome as,
uh, um, um, in, in, in, in their, in,
in their full. Capacity in all the different aspects
and dimensions, so we need to create an academic
field that looks at everything those people produced and
it has been passed on to us. Language, literature,
history, philosophy, art, any number of things. Anything you
can think of is part of the same field.
And that would then be called our classics eventually.
It takes a while in the Anglo world to
late 19th century for all these other elements to
be fully incorporated alongside the study of language and
literature, but eventually you end up with a field
that is holistic, that says we study everything about
the Greeks and Romans, and we call it the
classics.
Are other ancient cultures covered in universities and if
so in what kinds of departments and programs?
They are covered to a lesser extent because of,
well, the, the, the Greeks and Romans had a
head start, so they were privileged, privileged from the
beginning. There's less funding. They are covered, often in
very tiny programs that may be freestanding in some
cases, consolidated into larger schools. In other cases, Egyptologists
who only study pharaonic Egypt, Assyriologists who study Mesopotamia,
Judaists to study early Hebrew culture, um, people who
Iranian studies, people who just study Iran and Central
Asia. Uh, SINOLOGISTS who study early China, Sanskrit scholars
who studied the literary tradition of early, um, India.
There are experts in the archaeology and, and the
many different languages of Central, um, Asia, Central Eurasia,
the Steppe, uh, peoples who are increasingly well understood.
Uh, THERE are people in anthropology departments who study
the Olmecs and the Maya and the Aztecs and
the, the, uh, the Inca and, and all these
various civilizations in the Americas. Or, uh, uh, Kahokia
in the United States. Um, THERE are even fewer
people who try to study early cultures in sub-Saharan
Africa, but they all operate in different environments, in
different academic units, and they have little, if any,
contact with one another. And there are far fewer
people who do this, uh, than there are people
who studied Greece and Rome, that's fair to say.
OK, and do you think that that fact that
they operate in different units is problematic, and if
so, what can be done to correct this state
of affairs?
It is, I mean, it's as I said, it's
necessary to have expertise, but it doesn't mean you
have to be in your own mini unit. It
would make more sense to be embedded, and history
is a good example. You can be a historian
of the Middle Ages, and you can be a
historian of, uh, I don't know, um, the Iraq
War, and it would be in the same department,
and you would be next door to the person,
you know, studying the Middle Ages, and at least
there would be some communication, at least you would
hope. That's not usually the. Case with people who
study these various ancient societies, so it would make
sense to bring them together at least organizationally, um,
encourage broader teaching. It will also be of interest
to students, right? To be introduced to multiple societies,
um, at the same time in, in a user-friendly
way. Um, ALL these things could easily, uh, be
done. And now I've sort of forgot the original
question because that wasn't quite the question I was
answering.
No, I, I was asking you if there's something
that can be done to correct this state of
affairs of people that study different civilizations and cultures
operating in different units. Yeah, I
mean, I think what I just said really applies
to this because, like I said, there will always
be experts who always have to specialize in something
to some extent. But there should be way more
collaboration, uh, and that can be brought about by
organizational, um, reorganization, uh, in a way which is
happening anyway. It's usually happening for the wrong reasons,
like funding constraints, where you say, instead of having
5 small departments, we put them all together in
one big department and we reduce overhead and we
save some money. That's not really the the the
best reason for doing it, but at the end
of the day, maybe that's the way it will
have to be. It should be driven though by
an intellectual agenda. It should be driven not by
funding constraints. It should be driven by the realization
that all these experts are studying very similar things
and they would be better off if they were
embedded in larger structures that bring them together and
uh encourage more conversation among them.
And what does ancient history mean in a world
that is increasingly multiethnic and cosmopolitan?
I of course have now lived in the US
for 25 years. The question is what is ancient
history in the US? Is it just the ancient
history of the white settlers who came in from
Europe? Is it the ancient history of the people
from south of the border who descend from indigenous
civilizations in Mexico and further south? Is it the
ancient history of people who come in from East
Asia or South Asia? Is it the early history
of the indigenous people of North America who are
of course still here in small numbers, but they
are present? Well, it has to be a globalized
ancient history. It makes no sense to say the
Greeks and Romans are the ancient history of the
US. That's just absurd. And even for Europe, there's
a significant foreign born element, if you will, and
all countries to varying extents are now globalized, right?
They are incorporated into global structures. It means that
the outlook of the distant past ought to be
not just governed by narrowly nationalistic principles, it ought
to be more cosmopolitan, you know. And more globalized.
So I think, uh, for that reason alone, we
need a more globalized ancient history, but for intellectual
reasons because it makes the most sense. But also,
if you will, for ethical reasons, for for reasons
of equity, we can't just go on privileging one
tiny sliver, very influential sliver, but still a tiny
sliver of the ancient world at the expense of
everybody else.
And so is genuine ancient history, diverse and inclusive.
If it was set up in this way, it
would almost inevitably automatically become more diverse and inclusive.
Of course we can't end up with a globalized
ancient history that's some kind of ranking system. We
just conclude that the Greeks and Romans are better
than everybody else once we have compared them. That
wouldn't be very helpful. And I don't think anybody
wants that, but um we need to have arrived
at a situation where we can bring the different
specialisms in conversation with one another, and that would
certainly not just create barriers to the creation of
knowledge, it will also, I think, result in a
better understanding of the The fact that very deep
down people all over the world have more in
common than what separates them, and that's not a
recent phenomenon. It's not a result of homogenization, modernization.
That's part of the story, but it's something that
starts already many thousands of years ago in these
independent developmental processes.
And how can the global turn you talk about
in the book be executed?
It can be executed, I think, in terms of
a number of things. One is revaluation. We have
to in a way agree that this is worth
doing. If we don't agree on this, there won't
be any change, and I think the rationale for
this is pretty strong. It's very difficult, I think,
intellectually and ethically to say we should maintain the
status quo. The second step would then be reconceptualization.
How do we actually re-envision studying the ancient world?
What are the boundaries? What is the relationship between
expertise and broader engagement? A lot of thought is
needed to do that. It hasn't been done yet
because we're not there yet, but that's something that
would need to happen. And the third step would
then be reorganization. How do we reorganize the way
we train people, we teach students in secondary schooling
at universities? What's the best way of going about
doing things? There's probably no one way. There would
have to be experimentation, right? There might well be
different ways of reorganizing um academia and see how
they work out. This will take time. It will
run into formidable obstacles like inertia. Academic inertia is
extremely powerful, not to be underestimated, very closely related
to bureaucratic inertia. There's often very little you can
do about it, but it's worth at least starting
the process through reevaluation and reconceptualization, which we can
do even within the existing structures before the structures
themselves get changed.
Uh, WHAT do you make of cross-cultural scholarship and
comparative approaches? Are they important in this turn you
suggest in the book?
I think they're extremely important. Of course, not everybody
is going to become a comparative historian. It's not
the goal, but at the very least, there needs
to be some cross-cultural comparative awareness. My position is
maybe a bit radical. It is that it's actually
very difficult to fully understand any one case, any
one society you study without knowing other societies. Societies
as well, because you will never have a good
idea of what really matters and what doesn't. You
may be taken in by what is particularly well
documented in a particular case or what scholarship on
one particular case has tended to emphasize. And if
you go out and you look at 5 or
10 other cultures, you realize, well, there may be
other things that are just as important, but we
haven't really paid attention to them because they're less
well documented or because traditions of scholarship in my
own field have paid less attention to those values.
So I think this kind of basic Awareness is
not a bonus feature. It is essential to being
a proper historian. Not everybody would agree, but that's
my somewhat radical, uh, position. But at the very
least, this kind of awareness would, um, help us,
you know, do even our Approach our own specialisms
in a more promising way. And then on top
of that, if people are willing to do systematic
comparative work, that's great. And again, that's probably best
done in teams. If you have two or more
people getting together, working on a shared problem, on
a shared on a shared project, uh, that's probably
the best way to do it because you can
pool individual expertise, which is always in short supply.
It's always compartmentalized and by bringing people together, you
can create this kind of new knowledge that individuals
have a hard time creating. It does happen once
in a while, but you can't rely on genius
level polymaths who could just handle these things. It
has to be feasible for ordinary people, for regular
scholars to engage in this kind of work, and
that would certainly create, require a great deal more
collaboration than we have seen in the past.
In regards to the classics, I don't know if
you agree with me, but I think that because
of the way they are structured, they tend to
be characterized as Eurocentric elitist and historically associated with
white supremacy and colonialism. So what can be done
about them?
Um, AND I should say, in fact, it's not
just a European problem. There are Chinese classics too,
right? And, and especially the current regime in China
is certainly doubling down on this, right? And Mao
tried to get rid of the Confucian tradition, but
his successors have re-embraced it. And what if you
look at what goes on in India under the
current government, again, it's a pretty sort of nationalistic
kind of engagement with the legacies of India, specifically
and the Hindu and the Sanskrit tradition and so
on. So I should say it's not just Europe.
The European tradition is the most powerful and dominant
and best known, but it's not unique in that
regard. So having this kind of narrow focus is
a problem wherever it occurs, whether it's in Europe
or America or in other parts of the world,
we should transcend it. It's in our own interest
to transcend it, A, to understand the world better,
and B, arguably, this sounds very lofty, but maybe
to make the world a better place, right? If
we have a better, more sympathetic Understanding of the
origins of other um societies, realizing that their starting
conditions weren't necessarily all that different from our own,
that by itself should help us, um, be, you
know, feel a greater affinity, if you will, uh,
to people in other parts of the world and
understand that we are all part of the same
planetary story, which I think is really important. Because
the problems we face today are planetary in scale,
whether it's the environment, climate change, you name it.
These are not problems of just one people or
one cultural group. They are planetary problems, and we
have to engage them on a planetary scale. And
in that respect, having a planetary understanding of our
roots would be very helpful.
Do you think that the reforms you propose in
your book are likely to occur?
The answer is yes and no, or rather no
and yes. No, because of what I mentioned earlier,
institutional inertia. There's also self-selection. People who enter certain
fields into them because they like what they see.
They select for the way things, the way things
are currently being done. There may be other people
who might prefer things to be different, but they
may not join right now because they see what's
happening and they may be put off and they
might do something else instead. So these are formidable
obstacles. Change may well happen for the somewhat wrong
reasons, i.e., financial reasons, consolidation, academic administrators, government, legislators
deciding we can't afford to have separate. You know,
units for the Greeks and the Romans and the
Egyptians and the Chinese and all these people, we
consolidate them into broader units. That's not such a
terrible outcome unless it involves major cuts, which of
course often does. That's a problem. It shouldn't be
driven by funding concerns. It should be driven by
an intellectual agenda, but it's in a way there
is almost a bit of an alignment between what
I think should happen and by what is in
the interest of institutions in terms of their funding
and their. Organization to have uh uh lower barriers
between units, more communication among people who work on
similar things, and eventually greater consolidation in terms of
how we organize uh the production of knowledge.
What would you say is the true impact of
ancient history in our, on our lives today?
I think it goes back to what I said
earlier that everything we do is some kind of
supercharged version of what people came up with back
in the day. We eat more food, we have
more farming, we have genetic engineering, we use more
metal, we use more fuel. We have bigger cities.
We have more powerful governments. We have way more
literacy. We have more of many of the things
that people came up with in the past, but
deep down they are still the same things. We
haven't really invented anything that would be genuinely intrinsically
new, the way those things were new when they
were first developed 5000 or 10,000 years ago, depending
on where we look. So in that sense, antiquity
has won. I think I say this somewhere in
the book, we are the products of antiquity. We
haven't really transcended the ancient world. We have modified
and upgraded the things that were developed back then,
but we are firmly trapped in the creations of
this particular phase of development, and we should very
much be aware of this, because if we are
interested in doing things differently in transformative change. We
must have a good understanding of how things got
to be the way they are. And in order
to do that, we can't just study the last
50 years, 100 years, 500 years, saying it's all
about, you know, all the popular things, colonization, all
the rest of it. That's part of the story,
but it's all the latest step in a much
longer process that reaches back into this foundational period
of ancient history.
I have one last question, then, how do you
look at the future of ancient studies?
I think there are two directions that are not
just promising but probably inevitable in the long run.
One is the one we already talked about, a
more global perspective. The other is a greater convergence
between the study of history in particular and what
people do in other domains in the social sciences
and especially in the life sciences. I think in
particular of the ancient DNA revolution that we now
have knowledge of the pre-literate past of population movements,
of people's behavior, of kinship, of any number of
very basic features going back many thousands of years
we could not have dreamt of even 10 or
15 years ago. It has been an enormous revolution
in terms of what we're able to derive from
the evidence of ancient genetics of DNA extracted from
ancient bodies. We have made similar strides in terms
of climate research, needless to say, going back a
very long time to see how the climate has
behaved over time. There are other aspects of scientific
progress is rapid. Methods become cheaper, more accessible. It
will in the long term revolutionize our understanding of
early, pre-literate or scarcely literate societies because it will
produce a huge abundance of material that wasn't previously
available and will finally help us overcome. The division
between history of literate societies and the prehistory of
non-literate societies. So I think those are the two
growth areas, the major growth areas when it comes
to ancient studies, globalization on the one hand and
a greater collaboration with science on the other.
Great, so the book is again what is Ancient
History. I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview. And Doctor Scheidel, just before
we go apart from the book, would you like
to tell people where they can find your work
on the internet?
Oh, they can find my work on the internet
by Googling because I'm, I have, I'm fortunate in
that my name, Walter Scheidler is very uncommon. I
think I'm the only well-known person with that name.
So if you Google me, it's uh almost inevitable
that you come across, uh, my work, uh, my
own website, various links on Amazon, on various places.
You can see the various books I've published. I
published a big history of the Uh, uh, uh,
history of inequality from the Stone Age to the
21st century. I've published work on, on state formation,
the origins of modernity, uh, on ancient demography, the
ancient economy, any number of things. And of course,
increasingly, even academic articles, if people are interested in
this kind of work are now increasingly available again
via Google Scholar, you can click on them. They're
often um accessible in some format. I've published a
great deal of my work as working papers that
is not copyrighted, that can easily be um accessed.
So there's a, uh, a rather daunting amount of
my work out there, and it's very easy to
find just by Googling my name.
OK, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
pleasure to talk with you.
It has been a real pleasure. Thanks, thanks a
lot for having me on your program.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.